History of the Necronomicon



By H.P. Lovecraft (1927)



(There has been some difficulty over the date of this essay. Most give the date 
as 1936, following the Laney-Evans (1943) bibliography entry for the pamphlet 
version produced by the Rebel Press. This date, as can easily be ascertained 
from the fact that this was a "Limited Memorial Edition", is spurious (Lovecraft 
died in 1937); in fact, it dates to 1938. The correct date of 1927 comes from 
the final draft of the essay, which appears on a letter addressed to Clark 
Ashton Smith ("To the Curator of the Vaults of Yoh-Vombis, with the Concoctor's 
[?] Comments"). The letter is dated April 27, 1927 and was apparently kept by 
Lovecraft to circulate as needed.) 


  Original title Al Azif -- azif being the word used by Arabs to designate that 
  nocturnal sound (made by insects) suppos'd to be the howling of daemons. 
  Composed by Abdul Alhazred, a mad poet of Sanaá, in Yemen, who is said to have 
  flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D. He visited 
  the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis and spent ten 
  years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia -- the Roba el Khaliyeh or 
  "Empty Space" of the ancients -- and "Dahna" or "Crimson" desert of the modern 
  Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by protective evil spirits and monsters 
  of death. Of this desert many strange and unbelievable marvels are told by 
  those who pretend to have penetrated it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in 
  Damascus, where the Necronomicon (Al Azif) was written, and of his final death 
  or disappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told. He 
  is said by Ebn Khallikan (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an 
  invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large 
  number of fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He 
  claimed to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found 
  beneath the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and 
  secrets of a race older than mankind. [The Rebel Press edition adds this 
  editor's note: "A full description of the nameless city, and the annals and 
  secrets of its one time inhabitants will be found in the story THE NAMELESS 
  CITY, published in the first issue of Fanciful Tales, and written by the 
  author of this outline."] He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping 
  unknown entities whom he called Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu. 

  In A.D. 950 the Azif, which had gained a considerable tho' surreptitious 
  circulation amongst the philosophers of the age, was secretly translated into 
  Greek by Theodorus Philetas of Constantinople under the title Necronomicon. 
  For a century it impelled certain experimenters to terrible attempts, when it 
  was suppressed and burnt by the patriarch Michael. After this it is only heard 
  of furtively, but (1228) Olaus Wormius made a Latin translation later in the 
  Middle Ages, and the Latin text was printed twice -- once in the fifteenth 
  century in black-letter (evidently in Germany) and once in the seventeenth 
  (prob. Spanish) -- both editions being without identifying marks, and located 
  as to time and place by internal typographical evidence only. The work both 
  Latin and Greek was banned by Pope Gregory IX in 1232, shortly after its Latin 
  translation, which called attention to it. The Arabic original was lost as 
  early as Wormius' time, as indicated by his prefatory note; [the Rebel Press 
  edition adds paranthetically: "there is, however, a vague account of a secret 
  copy appearing in San Francisco during the present century, but later perished 
  in fire" -- a transparent reference to Clark Ashton Smith's tale "The Return 
  of the Sorcerer". Indeed, Lovecraft says in a letter to Richard F. Searight 
  (1935) "This 'history' must be modified in one respect -- since Klarkash-Ton's 
  'Return of the Sorceror' (pub in Strange Tales 3 yrs. ago) tells of the 
  survival of an Arabic text until modern times."] and no sight of the Greek 
  copy -- which was printed in Italy between 1500 and 1550 -- has been reported 
  since the burning of a certain Salem man's library in 1692. An English 
  translation made by Dr. Dee was never printed, and exists only in fragments 
  recovered from the original manuscript. [This sentence does not occur in the 
  first draft of the essay. It was added later, after Frank Belknap Long had 
  quoted from "John Dee's Necronomicon" in his tale "The Space Eaters" (1928).] 
  Of the Latin texts now existing one (15th cent.) is known to be in the British 
  Museum under lock and key, while another (17th cent.) is in the Bibliothèque 
  Nationale at Paris. A seventeenth-century edition is in the Widener Library at 
  Harvard, and in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham. Also in the 
  library of the University of Buenos Ayres. Numerous other copies probably 
  exist in secret, and a fifteenth-century one is persistently rumoured to form 
  part of the collection of a celebrated American millionaire. A still vaguer 
  rumour credits the preservation of a sixteenth-century Greek text in the Salem 
  family of Pickman; but if it was so preserved, it vanished with the artist 
  R.U. Pickman, who disappeared early in 1926. The book is rigidly suppressed by 
  the authorities of most countries, and by all branches of organised 
  ecclesiasticism. Reading leads to terrible consequences. It was from rumours 
  of this book (of which relatively few of the general public know) that R.W. 
  Chambers is said to have derived the idea of his early novel The King in 
  Yellow. 

  Chronology
  Al Azif written circa 730 A.D. at Damascus by Abdul Alhazred
  Tr. to Greek 950 A.D. as Necronomicon by Theodorus Philetas
  Burnt by Patriarch Michael 1050 (i.e., Greek text). Arabic text now lost.
  Olaus translates Gr. to Latin 1228
  1232 Latin ed. (and Gr.) suppr. by Pope Gregory IX
  14... Black-letter printed edition (Germany)
  15... Gr. text printed in Italy
  16... Spanish reprint of Latin text




This should be supplemented with a letter written to Clark Ashton Smith for 
November 27, 1927: 
  I have had no chance to produce new material this autumn, but have been 
  classifying notes & synopses in preparation for some monstrous tales later on. 
  In particular I have drawn up some data on the celebrated & unmentionable 
  Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred! It seems that this shocking 
  blasphemy was produced by a native of Sanaá, in Yemen, who flourished about 
  700 A.D. & made many mysterious pilgrimages to Babylon's ruins, Memphis's 
  catacombs, & the devil-haunted & untrodden wastes of the great southern 
  deserts of Arabia -- the Roba el Khaliyeh, where he claimed to have found 
  records of things older than mankind, & to have learnt the worship of 
  Yog-Sothoth & Cthulhu. The book was a product of Abdul's old age, which was 
  spent in Damascus, & the original title was Al Azif -- azif (cf. Henley's 
  notes to Vathek) being the name applied to those strange night noises (of 
  insects) which the Arabs attribute to the howling of daemons. Alhazred died -- 
  or disappeared -- under terrible circumstances in the year 738. In 950 Al Azif 
  was translated into Greek by the Byzantine Theodorus Philetas under the title 
  Necronomicon, & a century later it was burnt at the order of Michael, 
  Patriarch of Constantinople. It was translated into Latin by Olaus in 1228, 
  but placed on the Index Expurgatorius by Pope Gregory IX in 1232. [Note that 
  this does not appear in the final version of the essay. The explanation is 
  that the Index did not exist at this time, as further research must have 
  revealed to Lovecraft.] The original Arabic was lost before Olaus' time, & the 
  last known Greek copy perished in Salem in 1692. The work was printed in the 
  15th, 16th, & 17th centuries, but few copies are extant. Wherever existing, it 
  is carefully guarded for the sake of the world's welfare & sanity. Once a man 
  read through the copy in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham -- 
  read it through & fled wild-eyed into the hills ...... but that is another 
  story! 



In yet another letter (to James Blish and William Miller, 1936), Lovecraft says: 

  You are fortunate in securing copies of the hellish and abhorred Necronomicon. 
  Are they the Latin texts printed in Germany in the fifteenth century, or the 
  Greek version printed in Italy in 1567, or the Spanish translation of 1623? Or 
  do these copies represent different texts? 
Note that this is not entirely consistent with the accounts given earlier. 



Annotated Version
From Kendrick Kerwin Chua's Necronomicon FAQ 
With further annotation by Dan Clore 
(Note: I have substituted the corrected text for the older, corrupt text used in 
the FAQ. -- D.C.) 



    "History of the Necronomicon", by H.P. Lovecraft, written in 1937 with 
    footnotes and references by Kendrick Kerwin Chua, 1993. 
See above for the date of this essay. 
  Original title Al Azif -- azif being the word used by Arabs to designate that 
  nocturnal sound (made by insects) suppos'd to be the howling of daemons. 
  Composed by Abdul Alhazred, a mad poet of Sanaá, in Yemen, who is said to have 
  flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D. He visited 
  the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis and spent ten 
  years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia -- the Roba el Khaliyeh or 
  "Empty Space" of the ancients -- and "Dahna" or "Crimson" desert of the modern 
  Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by protective evil spirits and monsters 
  of death. Of this desert many strange and unbelievable marvels are told by 
  those who pretend to have penetrated it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in 
  Damascus, where the Necronomicon (Al Azif) was written, and of his final death 
  or disappearance (738 A.D.) many terrible and conflicting things are told. He 
  is said by Ebn Khallikan (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an 
  invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large 
  number of fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He 
  claimed to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found 
  beneath the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and 
  secrets of a race older than mankind. [The Rebel Press edition adds this 
  editor's note: "A full description of the nameless city, and the annals and 
  secrets of its one time inhabitants will be found in the story THE NAMELESS 
  CITY, published in the first issue of Fanciful Tales, and written by the 
  author of this outline."] He was only an indifferent Moslem, worshipping 
  unknown entities whom he called Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu. 
    (9) Note already how Lovecraft skirts the fine line between campy parody and 
    seriousness. In Lovecraft at Last, Conover writes that Lovecraft wrote the 
    history in order to allow people with any understanding of Arab studies to 
    see through the mock scholarship. Note also the inconsistencies here with 
    the description of Al-Hazred in the Simon Necronomicon. Al-Hazred there 
    supposedly witnessed the horrible rituals at Masshu, a mythical island at 
    the mouth of the Euphrates upon which Utnapishtim, the Babylonian Noah, 
    supposedly still resides today. Whereas Lovecraft describes the Crimson 
    Desert as the place where Al-Hazred witnessed much of what he wrote down. 
    Note also that in the Simon version, Al-Hazred warns against worshipping 
    "Iak-Sakkak" and "Kutulu", whereas Lovecrafts claims he did just that. Note 
    also the improper use of the A.D. prefix until the next paragraph. KKC 
  In A.D. 950 the Azif, which had gained a considerable tho' surreptitious 
  circulation amongst the philosophers of the age, was secretly translated into 
  Greek by Theodorus Philetas of Constantinople under the title Necronomicon.
    (10) Another inconsistency. Simon claims that Al-Hazred rendered the 
    Necronomicon in Greek first, rather than Arabic. KKC 
I haven't been able to find this claim in Simon's text, but he does claim that 
the manuscript he translated is a Greek version. As noted below, Lovecraft 
states that the Greek version was lost. 
  For a century it impelled certain experimenters to terrible attempts, when it 
  was suppressed and burnt by the patriarch Michael. After this it is only heard 
  of furtively, but (1228) Olaus Wormius made a Latin translation later in the 
  Middle Ages, and the Latin text was printed twice -- once in the fifteenth 
  century in black-letter (evidently in Germany) and once in the seventeenth 
  (prob. Spanish) -- both editions being without identifying marks, and located 
  as to time and place by internal typographical evidence only.
    (11) Interesting to note that Lovecraft does not say outright that someone 
    in our time had apparently found and identified these renditions of the 
    book. KKC 
  The work both Latin and Greek was banned by Pope Gregory IX in 1232, shortly 
  after its Latin translation, which called attention to it.
    (12) The archivist has thusfar been unable to find Al Azif, Necronomicon, or 
    anything even remotely similar on any of the forbidden book lists of the 
    era. But do consider that paper records from the 13th century are incomplete 
    and unpreserved, to say the least. KKC 
  The Arabic original was lost as early as Wormius' time, as indicated by his 
  prefatory note; [the Rebel Press edition adds paranthetically: "there is, 
  however, a vague account of a secret copy appearing in San Francisco during 
  the present century, but later perished in fire" -- a transparent reference to 
  Clark Ashton Smith's tale "The Return of the Sorcerer".] and no sight of the 
  Greek copy -- which was printed in Italy between 1500 and 1550 -- has been 
  reported since the burning of a certain Salem man's library in 1692. 
    (13) Again, Simon claims to have translated a Greek edition. KKC 
  An English translation made by Dr. Dee was never printed, and exists only in 
  fragments recovered from the original manuscript. 
    (14) An internal Lovecraft inconsistency. In his short story "The Dunwich 
    Horror", the old wizard called Whately utilizes a Dee translation of the 
    Necronomicon in order to produce children for Yog-Sothoth. A complete 
    listing of John Dee's books reveals none titled Necronomicon. KKC 
This is not an inconsistency, as old Wizard Whateley uses an incomplete 
manuscript of the Dee translation. Wilbur Whateley, Yog-Sothoth's son, requires 
the complete edition housed in the Miskatonic University Library to fill in the 
gaps in the fragmentary Dee version. 
  Of the Latin texts now existing one (15th cent.) is known to be in the British 
  Museum under lock and key, while another (17th cent.) is in the Bibliothèque 
  Nationale at Paris. A seventeenth-century edition is in the Widener Library at 
  Harvard, and in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham. Also in the 
  library of the University of Buenos Ayres. 
    (15) Other than the Harvard copy, which the archivist knows for sure does 
    not exist, and the fact that Miskatonic University is totally fictional, I 
    cannot say with absolute certainty that the other locations Lovecraft lists 
    do not have some copy of a book they may call the Necronomicon. Interested 
    parties may contact the archivist to confirm or deny posession of the book, 
    if they wish. KKC 
They don't. 
  Numerous other copies probably exist in secret, and a fifteenth-century one is 
  persistently rumoured to form part of the collection of a celebrated American 
  millionaire. A still vaguer rumour credits the preservation of a 
  sixteenth-century Greek text in the Salem family of Pickman; but if it was so 
  preserved, it vanished with the artist R.U. Pickman, who disappeared early in 
  1926. The book is rigidly suppressed by the authorities of most countries, and 
  by all branches of organised ecclesiasticism. Reading leads to terrible 
  consequences. It was from rumours of this book (of which relatively few of the 
  general public know) that R.W. Chambers is said to have derived the idea of 
  his early novel The King in Yellow. 
    (16) Much of the latter part of this paragraph is in fact derived from 
    Lovecraft's own short stories, most notably "The Picture in the House", 
    which featured the sadistic Robert Pickman character. Also, Lovecraft 
    repeatedly cites Chambers' book as his main inspiration, although he created 
    the Necronomicon before he first read Chambers. KKC 
The story featuring Robert Upton Pickman is, of course, "Pickman's Model", not 
"The Picture in the House". See above on Chambers. I am unaware of any serious 
statement by Lovecraft attesting to any significant influence from Chambers' 
work. 